=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Lab::Moose::Developer - Developer tutorial.

=head2 Writing drivers

The driver infrastructure is based on L<Moose>.
For Moose basics see e.g.

=over

=item *

The L<Modern Perl book|http://modernperlbooks.com/>, available online for free,
contains a chapter on Moose.

=item *

For full details, see the very well written L<Moose::Manual>.

=back

=head3 Code example

We start with a section of code from the L<Lab::Moose::Instrument::SR830>
LIA driver and discuss the most important steps. This explains the most
important parts of a driver, i.e. initialization, getters, setters, caching,
...

 package Lab::Moose::Instrument::SR830;
 
 use 5.010;
 use Moose;
 use MooseX::Params::Validate;
 use Lab::Moose::Instrument qw/validated_getter validated_setter/;
 use Lab::Moose::Instrument::Cache;
 use Carp;
 use namespace::autoclean;

 our $VERSION = '3.520';

 # (1)
 extends 'Lab::Moose::Instrument';

 # (2)
 with qw/Lab::Moose::Instrument::Common/;

 # (3)
 sub BUILD {
     my $self = shift;
     $self->clear();
     $self->cls();
 }

 # (4)
 cache amplitude => (getter => 'get_amplitude');

 # (5)
 sub get_amplitude {
     my ($self, %args) = validated_getter(\@_);

     # (6)
     return $self->cached_amplitude(
         $self->query( command => 'SLVL?', %args ) );
 }

 sub set_amplitude {
     # (7)
     my ( $self, $value, %args ) = validated_setter(
         \@_,
         value => { isa => 'Num' }
     );
     
     # (8)
     $self->write( command => "SLVL $value", %args );
     $self->cached_amplitude($value);
 }

 # (9)
 __PACKAGE__->meta()->make_immutable();
 1;

=head3 Explanations

=over

=item

 extends 'Lab::Moose::Instrument';

All drivers inherit from L<Lab::Moose::Instrument>. This base class provides
the access to the underlying connection via methods like C<write>, C<query> and
C<clear>.

=item

 with qw/Lab::Moose::Instrument::Common/;

The L<Lab::Moose::Instrument::Common> role contains methods for GPIB common
commands like I<*IDN>, I<*RST>, I<*CLS>, ...

=item

 sub BUILD {
     my $self = shift;
     $self->clear();
     $self->cls();
 }

This C<BUILD> method (see L<Moose::Manual::Construction>) executes a device
clear and clears the error status.

=item

 cache amplitude => (getter => 'get_amplitude');

Accessing instruments settings by querying them from the device can be slow. It
is mutch faster if the setters and getters store the setting in an object
attribute (See L<Moose::Manual::Attributes>). This line creates an attribute
for storing the amplitude value of the LIA's reference output.

The attribute can then be accessed with the C<cached_amplitude> method.

If the getter is called while the attributes is unset, the C<get_amplitude>
method will be called under the hood to initialize the attribute.

What if the initialization should call the get_amplitude method with additional
arguments, say C<< timeout => 10 >>? This can be done by overwriting the
builder method of the attribute in your driver:

 sub cached_amplitude_builder {
     my $self = shift;
     return $self->get_amplitude( timeout => 10 );
 }

See L<Lab::Moose::Instrument::Cache> for full details.

=item

 sub get_amplitude {
     my ($self, %args) = validated_getter(\@_);

We come to the getter function, which queries the amplitude from the LIA.
The C<validated_getter> function (from L<Lab::Moose::Instrument>) allows the
user to pass additional options, like a timeout, to the underlying connection:

 my $amplitude = $self->get_amplitude(timeout => 10);
 my $amplitude = $self->get_amplitude(); # Use default timeout.

=item

 return $self->cached_amplitude(
         $self->query( command => 'SLVL?', %args ) );
 
We read the amplitude from the instrument and store it's value into the cache.
Don't forget the C<%args> argument to C<query>!

=item

 sub set_amplitude {
     my ( $self, $value, %args ) = validated_setter(
         \@_,
         value => { isa => 'Num' }
     );

The C<validated_setter> function parses the arguments of the setter method.
We require that the value argument is a number.

=item

 $self->write( command => "SLVL $value", %args );
 $self->cached_amplitude($value);

We pass the new amplitude to the instrument and update the cache.

=item

 __PACKAGE__->meta()->make_immutable();

Every Moose class shell end this way. See L<Moose::Manual::BestPractices>.

=back

=head3 Roles for SCPI instruments

TODO

=head3 Writing connections

TODO

=head2 Data files and plotting

TODO

=head2 