=pod

=head1 NAME

Lab::Measurement::Contributing - How to contribute to Lab::Measurement

=head1 How to contribute to Lab::Measurement

L<Lab::Measurement> is a community-maintained Free Software
Project. Improvements on the code, documentation and tests are always welcome.

Below you find a list of instructions you should follow, when contributing to
L<Lab::Measurement>'s development.

=over

=item

If you plan major changes, discuss them as soon as possible with us. 

=item

Document each new feature.

If you write new drivers, it is good to provide real-world measurements scripts
in the F<example/> directory.

=item

Make sure that your commits do not break existing tests.

Add tests if you introduce new features.

The test for new drivers will need the Mock Connection. See
L<Lab::Measurement::Testing>.

=item

Create a commit for each logically independent change.

Once you have commited your changes,
use B<git format-patch> and send the patches to our mailinglist.

=item

Do not introduce new non-Core dependencies. 

=item

Keep the LICENSE or COPYRIGHT section as is. For new packages, do not include
these sections. The L<Lab::Measurement> distribution is
licenced under the Perl 5 licence and there is no need to duplicate this
information in the docs of each package.

=item

Do B<not> create an AUTHORS section.

All source files of the L<Lab::Measurement> distribution are maintained by the
community.

Your name and mail address will be
recorded in the commit messages of your patches.

Do not touch existing AUTHORS sections.

=back

