=pod

=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

Lab::Measurement::Installation - Installation guide for Lab::Measurement

=head1 Introduction

Since Lab::Measurement does not contain any device driver code itself, its installation is 
pretty straightforward. However, before you can actually use it, you will have to install
a driver binding back-end, such as Lab::VISA or Linux-GPIB, plus its dependencies. Please 
see the documentation of these packages for more details.

=head1 Installation on Windows XP with ActiveState Perl 

=over

=item

Install Perl.

=over

=item *

Tested with ActivePerl from L<http://www.activestate.com/Products/activeperl/index.mhtml>

=item *

Make sure to include Perl Package Manager.

=item *

Make sure to activate the check box to include perl directory in PATH variable.

=back

=item

Install gnuplot (not mandatory)

=over

=item *

Download from L<http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=2055> (gp425win32.zip)

=item *

Extract and put it somewhere

=item *

Add directory containing C<pgnuplot.exe> to path:
My Computer => Properties => Advanced => Environment Variables

=back

=item

Install the dependencies of our perl modules. Depending on how familiar you are
with the perl infrastructure, the easiest might be to use PPM, the Perl Package Manager
included with ActivePerl.

Lab::Measurement needs

 XML::Generator (PPM would write it as XML-Generator)
 XML::DOM
 XML::Twig
 YAML

=item

Install Lab::Measurement

=over

=item *

Unzip/copy sources

=item *

Run the following commands in the source directory

    perl Build.PL
    perl Build
    perl Build install

=back

=item

Have fun!

=back

=head1 Installation on Windows XP with Strawberry Perl

Strawberry Perl is a Perl distribution for Windows that most closely
mimics a Perl installation under Linux. It comes with gcc compiler, dmake
and the other relevant tools included.

Lab::Measurement should in principle install out of the box with just the command

	cpan Lab::Measurement

executed on the commandline.

=head1 Installation on Linux

As a Linux user you will probably be able to figure out most things yourself. 

=over

=item

Install the dependencies

Best you'll use your distribution package management. You need

 XML::Generator
 XML::DOM
 XML::Twig
 YAML
 ... and GnuPlot

=item

Install Lab::Measurement

=over

=item *

Unzip/copy sources

=item *

Run the following commands in the source directory

    perl Build.PL
    perl Build
    perl Build install

=back

=item

Have fun!

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

 (c) 2010, 2011 Daniel Schröer, Andreas K. Hüttel, Daniela Taubert, and others.
     2012       Andreas K. Hüttel

=cut

